Add docs for foreman_ansible 3.x (#1361)
theforeman/theforeman.org: plugins/foreman_ansible/3.x/index.md

---
layout: plugin
title: Foreman Ansible 3.x Manual
version: 3.x
---

# 1. Basics

> Foreman Ansible allows you to import hosts via Ansible, along with facts about these hosts and reports of their playbook runs. This plugin 3.x series should be compatible with any version of Foreman above 1.22, including 1.22. Foreman Ansible relies on [Foreman Remote Execution](plugins/foreman_remote_execution) in order to be able to run playbooks remotely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Foreman Ansible allows you to import hosts via Ansible, along with facts about these hosts and reports of their playbook runs. This plugin 3.x series should be compatible with Foreman 1.22 and newer. Foreman Ansible relies on [Foreman Remote Execution](plugins/foreman_remote_execution) in order to be able to run playbooks remotely.
```

Every time you run a playbook or an Ansible module, Foreman will receive facts and a report for the host you have executed it on. If you ran Ansible from Foreman itself, the output of your Ansible run will be saved in our database.

You can define a list of roles to enforce and run arbitrary playbooks on the hosts.
![host with reports](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/registered_host.png)
![rex results](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/rex_results.png)
![rex playbook_output](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/rex_playbook_output.png)

# 2. Installation

## 2.1 Ansible callback

<script type="text/javascript">
function update_ansible_version(select) {
  var version = select.value;
  $(".ansible_version").hide();
  if (version && version != 'none') {
    $(".ansible_version_"+version).show();
  } else {
    $(".ansible_version_none").show();
  }
}
</script>

In order to make Ansible send us data from the hosts, we set up a callback on your host that runs Ansible.
To provide specific installation instructions, please select your Ansible version:

> <select onChange="update_ansible_version(this);">

Reviewer: IMHO we should hard require Ansible 2.5+ so there's only a single set of instructions. Reading these instructions it may even be 2.2+ since those instructions are the same.

bin_ansible_callbacks = True
{% endhighlight %}

  <li>
  And run this line to download the callback file in the appropriate location:
  </li>

{% highlight bash %}
wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ansible/ansible/stable-2.2/lib/ansible/plugins/callback/foreman.py -O ~/.ansible/plugins/callback_plugins/foreman.py
{% endhighlight %}
</ul>
</div>

<div class="ansible_version ansible_version_22 ansible_version_21" style="display:none;">

<p>
You need to configure it via the following environment variables (the variables need to be available to the user running the callback. Usually <code>foreman-proxy</code>):
</p>

<ul>
  <li>
    FOREMAN_URL: the URL of your Foreman installation (default "http://localhost:3000")
  </li>
  <li>
    FOREMAN_SSL_CERT: The public key when using SSL client certificates (default "/etc/foreman/client_cert.pem")
  </li>
  <li>
    FOREMAN_SSL_KEY: The private key when using SSL client certificates (default  "/etc/foreman/client_key.pem")
  </li>
  <li>
    FOREMAN_SSL_VERIFY: Use *False* to disable certificate checks. You can also set it
    to use the local CA bundle "True", or a path to a CA file for a custom CA.
  </li>
</ul>

<p>

> Since the 'foreman' and 'foreman-proxy' are 'no-login' users, you should set these in the <code>EnviromentFile</code> used by systemd, <code>/etc/sysconfig/foreman</code> and <code>/etc/sysconfig/foreman-proxy</code>. An alternative for other users is to put them in their <code>.bashrc</code> as <code>export FOREMAN_URL=yoururl</code>. In most distributions environment variables set in <code>/etc/environment</code> will be shared among all users.

Reviewer: We no longer support running directly from Foreman so `<code>/etc/sysconfig/foreman</code>` is no longer needed

For example, here is how to run 'yum install -y vim' once, on one host.

![run ansible job](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/run_ansible_job.gif)

And here is how to schedule a playbook run in the future on multiple hosts:

![schedule ansible job](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/schedule_ansible_job.gif)

For more information about scheduled jobs, check out the [Foreman Remote Execution manual](/plugins/foreman_remote_execution)

## 4.5 Overriding Ansible Variables in Playbooks

[Ansible variables](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_variables.html) are referenced in playbooks and templates with the syntax {% raw %}"{{ myvariable }}"{% endraw %}. For example:

```yaml
template: src=foo.cfg.j2 dest={% raw %}{{ remote_install_path }}{% endraw %}/foo.cfg
```

uses the `remote_install_path` variable. You can use Foreman to override these variables. The variables will only be overridden if you run your roles from Foreman, as Foreman sends an inventory with a dictionary contianing variable names and values when it runs Ansible roles.

There are several ways to override an Ansible variable:

> 1. Import the variable following [this section of the manual](plugins/foreman_ansible/2.x/index.html#4.1.2ImportingVariables). Once the variable is imported, you may change the default value:

Reviewer: Any reason this refers to the 2.x manual?

![ansible variables matchers](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/ansible_variables_matchers.png)

2. Another way to override the variable is to set it as a Job Template input. For example, let's create a Job Template containing a playbook with the variable \{\{ command \}\}.

![override_var_1](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/override_var_1.png)

Then set a Job Template Input with the name of the variable "command":

![override_var_2](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/override_var_2.png)

As you see, the variable "command" is now available to be set on every Job Template run.

![override_var_3](static/images/plugins/foreman_ansible/override_var_3.png)

You can override this variable every time you run the Job Template by setting the variable as Input. This takes precedence over Host Parameters.

# 5. Help

Please follow our [standard procedures and contacts]({{site.baseurl}}support.html).

## 5.1 Troubleshooting

Errors regarding the import of facts and reports will show up on /var/log/foreman/production.log of your Foreman host.

If you find a bug, please file it in

> [Redmine](http://projects.theforeman.org/projects/ansible/issues/new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Redmine](https://projects.theforeman.org/projects/ansible/issues/new).
```
